************************
How to develop your NApp
************************

To create your own NApp you will need to use the `kytos` command provider by
`kytos-utils` package. This package is already installed in your system if you
setup your develop environment.

To see the `kytos` helper you must run the following command to display the
helper in the command line.

.. code-block:: shell

  (kytos-environment)$ kytos -h
  kytos - The kytos command line.

  Usage: kytos [-c <file>|--config <file>] <command> [<args>...]
         kytos [-v|--version]
         kytos [-h|--help]

  Options:
    -c <file>, --config <file>    Load config file [default: ~/.kytosrc]
    -h, --help                    Show this screen.
    -v, --version                 Show version.

  The most commonly used kytos commands are:
     napps      Create, list, enable, install (and other actions) NApps.
     server     Start, Stop your Kytos Controller (Kytos)
     web        Manage the Web User Interface

  See 'kytos <command> -h|--help' for more information on a specific command.


In this section we will use the command `kytos napps` to handle your own NApp.

Create your NApp
================

To create your NApp you need to use your napp-server name and insert some NApp
information. Using the following command you will create a basic structure.


.. code-block:: shell

  (kytos-environment)$ kytos napps create

  --------------------------------------------------------------
  Welcome to the bootstrap process of your NApp.
  --------------------------------------------------------------
  In order to answer both the username and the napp name,
  You must follow this naming rules:
  - name starts with a letter
  - name contains only letters, numbers or underscores
  - at least three characters
  --------------------------------------------------------------

  Please, insert your NApps Server username: <username>
  Please, insert your NApp name: <napp name>
  Please, insert a brief description for your NApp [optional]: <brief description>

  Congratulations! Your NApp have been bootstrapped!
  Now you can go to the directory tutorial/helloworld and begin to code your NApp.
  Have fun!

After that a folder with `username` will be created and inside that we have
your NApp folder.

Understanding the NApp structure
--------------------------------

After created your NApp we have the basic NApp structure.

.. code-block:: shell

   <username>/
   ├── __init__.py
   └── <napp_name>/
       ├── __init__.py
       ├── kytos.json
       ├── main.py
       ├── README.rst
       ├── settings.py
       └── ui/
           ├── k-action-menu
           ├── k-info-panel
           ├── k-toolbar
           └── README.rst


- **kytos.json**: This file contains your NApp’s metadata.
- **settings.py**: Main settings parameters of your NApp.
- **main.py**: Main source code of your NApp.
- **README.rst**: Main description and information about your NApp.
- **ui**: Folder with components to be displayed in the Kytos UI
- **ui/README.rst**: A file with a brief description of your NApp components.

How to document your API Rest
=============================



How to register your NApp in the NApps respository
==================================================




How to upload your NApp in the NApps repository
===============================================


How the events works
====================


Events that are generated by Kytos
==================================

In the Kytos project we have a list of events generated by kytos. You can read
the section :doc:`./listened_events` to know more about events generated by
kytos.

The kytos events are divided in some categories, below a list of all
categories is displayed.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 3

   listened_events
