:EP: BP021
:Title: Kytos testing pipeline and definitions
:Authors:
    - Humberto Diógenes <hdiogenes@gmail.com>
    - Rogério Motitsuki <rogerio@ansp.br>
    - Carlos Magno <cmagnobarbosa@gmail.com>
    - Gleyberson Andrade <gleybersonandrade@gmail.com>
    - José Mauro Ribeiro <zemauror@gmail.com>
:Created: 2020-01-30
:Kytos-Version: 2020.1
:Status: Draft
:Type: Informational


Abstract
========

This blueprint proposes the implementation of higher-level automated tests for
Kytos, splitting Kytos tests into three major categories with different
requisites of scope, total running time and frequency: Unit Tests, Integration
Tests and End-to-End Tests. Each of those categories is described, as well as a
new Continuous Integration Pipeline to accommodate them.


Motivation
==========

Nowadays Kytos doesn't have a well-defined testing pipeline and only unit tests
are widely implemented. Besides that, we don't have a clear separation on our
test types and Kytos engineers are using different terminology to describe them.
We also don't have any kind of test groups. For example: some tests may run for
many minutes or even hours and there's no easy way to run only the tests that
run fast. In a near future, we'll need a separation for tests that will run with
virtual switches and/or real hardware.

Test results visibility is another area that can be improved. As Kytos is made
of many different repositories – 4 main projects (kytos [core], kytos-utils,
kytos-ui and python-openflow) and 11 NApps (Network Applications) – we need a
better way to check the status of the tests and the unit test coverage on each
project.


Rationale
=========

Testing is required for an effective performance of software application or
product. Some benefits of automating the tests include: to avoid repetitive work
and to have a faster feedback.


Specification
=============

Use three classes as test categories: Unit Test, Integration Test and E2E Test.

- **Unit Test:** In unit testing, you look to cover the application’s
  functionality at its most basic level. Test each individual unit of code,
  typically a method, in isolation to see if given certain conditions it
  responds in the expected way. This test has to be executed very quickly, in
  fact, one tenth of a second is considered slow for unit tests;
- **Integration Test:** An integration test takes a small group of units, often
  two units, and tests their behavior as a whole, verifying that they coherently
  work together;
- **E2E Test:** An end-to-end test tests your entire system from one end to the
  other, treating everything in between as a black box. Unfortunately,
  end-to-end tests are slower, more flaky, and more expensive to maintain than
  unit or integration tests.

  **Unit Tests - > Integration Tests -> End-to-End Tests**

  "So how do we create that ideal feedback loop? By thinking smaller, not
  larger; as a good first guess, Google often suggests a 70/20/10 split:
  **70% unit tests, 20% integration tests, and 10% end-to-end tests.**"
  [*Mike Wacker, Adam Bender (Google) - Just Say No to More End-to-End Tests,
  Testing on the Toilet: What Makes a Good End-to-End Test? [6,7]*]


Unit Tests
----------

**Definition:**

For unit tests we will follow the "sociable" unit test definition. A "sociable"
unit test can cover the behavior of a single unit, that can rely on other units
to fulfill its behavior, although access to external services, or
non-deterministic components, must be avoided, with the use of mock services
whenever possible. The unit test must run really fast: a test suite must run
hundreds/thousands of tests per minute.

Some "anti-patterns" must be avoided:
- Dependencies between test cases
- Interdependent tests
- Slow running tests

The "test code coverage" metric will be used with the unit test runner.
A target for a good coverage must be above 85%.

For the Kytos project, the default Python test framework is pytest and it must
be used for any new test created.


Integration Tests
-----------------

**Definition:**

For the integration test we use the concept of narrow integration tests. They
test all the parts that live outside the application, such as other services,
database, and filesystem. It means that the application  and component/service
integrating with must run. External integrated services can run locally or be a
fake service that mimics the behaviour of a real service The test can be done
one integration at a time. All other services can be replaced by test doubles.

Integration tests must be written to all pieces that serialize data, such as:
        - calls to services´ REST API
        - calls to other application´s API
        - read/write to database
        - read/write queues
        - write to filesystem

Integration tests must be written for each NApp module, in a different test
folder with a proper setup environment.


End-to-End Tests
----------------

**Type:** REST API & User Interface End-to-End Tests

**Definition:** Test on a live version of all services, interconnected
subsystems and dependent systems. Test the process flows along with front end &
backend & middle-tier systems

Test Tags
---------

In parallel with the three major categories described above, we may also start
to use test tags that make it easier to separate tests that will run in virtual
hardware (ovs / mininet) or real hardware (switches available for automated
testing), and tags to group tests by running time:

- small: <60s
- medium: <300s
- big: 900s+


Continuous Integration Pipeline
-------------------------------

Objectives
``````````

- Before commit: optional/manual tests
- Before push: manual test; individual devs may locally automate unit tests w/
  git hook
- Pull Request created/updated:  unit tests + linter + small/medium integration
  tests
- After merge: all tests on virtual environment
- Every day: all tests, including real hardware
- Every week: not needed (all tests run every day); future: chaos monkey [2]
- Before release: all tests (just for sake of sanity)
- [tagging of the release]
- After release: just python/distro packages


Test Panel
==========

Together with this blueprint we've also developed a proof-of-concept aggregation
for the test results, which may be used as a starting point for a "Kytos Test
Panel" which will aggregate test and coverage results, for the purpose of
increasing the visibility of Kytos code quality statistics for users and
developers.

- https://kytos-tests-analytics.herokuapp.com/
- https://git.ncc.unesp.br/kytos/misc/blob/master/scoreboard/scoreboard.py


Rejected Ideas
==============

A separate System Tests category was discussed, but dropped for now.

**Test:** System test

**Frequency:** Every merge, nightly

**Definition:**

- Tests the whole integrated software and requires a live version of all
  services.
- Requires substantial test environment and network access
- It must check all features, fuctionalities, specifications and run functional
  and non-functional testing
- For the Kytos project, the system tests and end-to-end tests would run in the
  same pipeline process since they all need the live services.


Open Issues
===========

- Some NApps have unit test coverage 0% - do we write unit tests for them or
  jump straight into integration tests? -> minimal unit test coverage is needed
- Development roadmap: will we start writing E2E tests in parallel, or just
  after we have integration tests running? -> integration first


References
==========

- EP015 - System tests for NApps validation:
    - https://github.com/kytos/kytos/blob/master/docs/blueprints/EP015.rst
- pytest - Good Integration Practices:
    - https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/goodpractices.html
- Getting Started With Testing in Python:
    - https://realpython.com/python-testing/#writing-integration-tests
- Test Sizes:
    - https://testing.googleblog.com/2010/12/test-sizes.html
- Just say no to more end-to-end tests:
    - https://testing.googleblog.com/2015/04/just-say-no-to-more-end-to-end-tests.html
- Testing on the Toilet: What Makes a Good End-to-End Test?
    - https://testing.googleblog.com/2016/09/testing-on-toilet-what-makes-good-end.html
